[Music]
hello very good morning to you welcome
to breakfast with john k and louise
minchin
morning our headlines today europe shuts
its doors to the uk
as fears grow over the spread of a new
variant of coronavirus
i'm live at the port of dover where ten
thousand lorries pass through here
every day but not today the sign behind
me says it all
french borders closed lewis hamilton is
named bbc sports personality of the year
he wins for a second time
after securing a record-equaling seventh
formula one world title
[Music]
and strictly bring some sparkle as bill
and oti lifted the glitter ball we'll be
speaking to fellow finalist jamie lang
morning for england and wales today it's
going to be fairly cloudy and wet but
very mild for scotland in northern
ireland drier view with some showers in
the northwest
and some rain sweeping into the south
later but again much cooler
than in the south i'll have more details
in 10 minutes
[Music]
good morning monday the 21st of december
and our top story is that a growing
number of countries have
shut their borders to the uk in response
to the spread of that new variant of
coronavirus
france says it will not accept any
passengers or lorries from britain for
48 hours the government said it expects
severe disruption
at ports in kent the prime minister will
discuss the growing crisis
at an emergency cobra meeting later
today
john donason has the very latest
after queues of up to 20 miles into
dover last week
amid brexit uncertainty things could be
about to get worse
the port is now shut to all outbound
freight
and passengers after france closed its
border with the uk
for 48 hours amid fears about the spread
of the new strain of coronavirus
this is an absolute hammer blow after
all the cues that we've had at ports in
the last week
caused by brexit stockpiling and of
course the christmas rush
so there's real confusion real
uncertainty
in the industry tonight the transport
secretary grant shaps has urged hawley
as not to travel to kent
incoming freight is still permitted but
there are fears some lorry drivers won't
want to come to the uk
for risk of getting stuck dover usually
handles around
10 000 lorries a day delivering nearly
20 percent of
all good bought and sold here the food
and drink federation has said it's
worried about the supply of fresh
products over christmas
and it's not just freight affected this
was heathrow last night where passengers
were left stranded amid
travel bans from much of europe eurostar
and
euro tunnel have also suspended all
outbound traffic
we must i'm afraid look again at
christmas
two days after the prime minister
announced the new restrictions
he'll chair a meeting of the
government's emergency cobra committee
this morning
to discuss the coronavirus crisis
meanwhile government sources have
insisted the travel bans won't affect
the delivery of
covet vaccines and all this as trade
talks with the eu remain gridlocked as
the december 31st
brexit deadline edges closer
john donason bbc news
let's get the very latest let's cross
live to a correspondent
in the port of dover simon jones who's
there for us this morning simon what are
you seeing what do you not see
well the port is very very quiet you can
see at the entrance to the port there
are a number of officials
basically telling people that they
cannot get across the channel the sign
says it all
french borders close now you can see
just on the roundabout here that a
number of lorries
are turning up for some the message
doesn't appear to have got
through that they cannot cross the
channel
so it's going to be a challenging day
for the authorities here
trying to stop traffic chaos now we know
that
ten thousand lorries pass through the
port each and every day
where are they all going to go well i
spoke to juan horlier who's based here
in kent he was stuck in the queues in
the port he didn't manage to get on a
ferry before the 11
pm deadline he simply said i'm going
home
but if you're a foreigner you don't have
that option
so what the authorities are doing is
turning part of the m20 motorway down
there
into a giant lorry park that can stack
hundreds of vehicles there's also talk
of using
a disused airfield here in kent for
another
four thousand lorries but the message
from the government
is please if you're a hauler do not come
to kent
at all this is likely to continue for at
least the next couple of days while the
eu decides
what to do next and so it's likely to be
a busy time
for people here and on the roads too
simon jones in dover thank you very much
indeed well there's so much to talk
about this morning isn't there the prime
minister is going to chair a meeting of
the government's cobra committee today
to address concerns over
that significant disruption they could
talk about caused by the travel ban
let's speak to our political
correspondent in watson who's in
westminster
in really get a sense this is very much
a moving story does just
talk about for example the borders with
france are closed i mean
is this unprecedented it's not
unprecedented but it usually is outside
of uh for example
uh wartime the french borders have been
closed of course
uh to travelers earlier this year during
the first wave of the coronavirus crisis
but what is extraordinary this time is
that
all uh freight and less unaccompanied is
now being uh stopped for 48 hours so the
flow of goods too and indeed from
the continent severely disrupted now the
government say they have
contingency plans and they're urgently
putting further contingency plans in
place that's partly why
the emergency committee cobra is meeting
uh this morning and
the prime minister will be chairing that
but there's also a whole series of other
ministerial meetings some were going on
today last night transport ministers and
home office ministers
were meeting initially to deal with the
travel disruption that was going to be
caused not just because of the
uh the freight problems of france which
is the most major uh
problem that we have but also of course
a whole range of other countries
imposing
uh travel bans on their flights for
example or arrivals by
sea if you're a passenger that includes
italy belgium the netherlands
so all these restrictions will be put in
place until the eu decides on a
an approach which affects the whole
continent today
and there's also been calls not just
because of this particular
crisis or this aspect of it but because
of the government's new restrictions
these tier four restrictions in
london and the south east and they
changed the christmas plans
they've been called from some of boris
johnson's own mps including a former
conservative leader ian duncan smith
to have parliament recalled okay where's
the moment thank you very much thank you
meanwhile
christmas uh let's talk about the impact
of these new restrictions and the new
tears
on festive plans couple of updates for
you this morning christmas bubbles
in northern ireland are going to be
reduced from five days
to one day it's understood that the
storm and executive agreed that change
overnight there's expected to be some
flexibility though
around which day people can come
together to accommodate those
who have to work on christmas day itself
wales has entered another national
lockdown and only two households can
gather on christmas day yeah people
there are being told to stay at home
and non-essential businesses must shut
again
let's speak to thomas morgan who's in
cardiff for us this morning
and thomas another lockdown in wales
what's been the reaction there
well the lockdown was due to come into
force on the 28th when those original
christmas plans were due to end but the
welsh government has felt as though
they've had to bring it in
uh quicker it came into force on
saturday
evening because the welsh government and
the health minister here said that this
new strain of coronavirus is seeded
across the whole of wales as well and
with transmission rates in wales higher
than
any of the other four nations of the uk
they felt as though they had to put
stricter measures in place really there
are areas in the south wales valleys
where the
transmission rate is above the thousands
per hundred thousand now so there is
real concern there
three of these seven health boards
across wales have
cut non-essential surgeries uh critical
capable um walls across wales are busier
now than they've ever been
throughout this pandemic so there is
real concern and something had to be
done to alleviate this stream
on the nhs because there will be a surge
over the next two weeks
as the transmission rates continue so
they felt they have to put these
measures in
so they could suppress the virus as we
go into the new year and make sure that
the
impact on the nhs wasn't as bad as it
could be
okay thomas in cardiff for now thank you
very much indeed
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all
the latest with bbc news